You are listening to radiolab radio from w n y.
S t. E.
Let me tell you, there is nothing like the sheer elation of discovery.
And I think you know this, this is the end of malaria.
This is the end of everything else. Mosquitoes spread. Wait a minute, you know,
ticks spread Lyme disease. We can probably get rid of that too.
So in the morning you were like [inaudible] you're singing to the turtles in
the, in the park. And pretty much,
and I get myself a full day of being who?
And then I started thinking but, but, but,
but what if something goes wrong?
I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich.
This is radio lab and the guy that you just heard is Kevin Esvelt.
He's a scientist.
He was talking to our producers store in wheeler and Molly Webster about CRISPR,
which is a technology, actually it's a new,
it's a gene editing technology that did, can we shape life actually?
Yeah. And we uh,
we ended up doing an entire show about this and we called it a antibody's part
one.
I do remember that if there was going to be a part to that name that it's like
telling someone you got them a birthday present but you haven't yet.
[inaudible] they do. We should just own up Radiolab listeners.
We did not blueprint their presence. Let's just listen.
That teams mean no, we meant to, we meant to have a part two but you know,
we were doing a story. It fell apart.
We again always work out tape sucked frankly.
And we thought it was going to be a story.
It just turned and turn out to be a story. But now we have,
what we're going to do is we're going to pay you what you're doing is the part
two. Yeah, this is the part two,
finally part two because CRISPR in the time that we did the thing till now has
gone banana. Crazy. So much has happened. Really? Yeah.
Like every day in the science section,
which I know we all read religiously if there is a CRISPR thing. Yeah.
So just to get us started, we're going to play you the original piece. Uh,
for those of you who never heard it,
just to sort of set the baseline and then we're gonna come back and tell you all
the stuff that has happened since. Yeah. Yes, there is.
Let me explain to you how I got, got started with this.
You were at some kind of an affair. Yeah. A, I'll tell you how good.
I was at a party party. Uh, it was a, it was a,
a conference where they have a lot of different people of different disciplines
come together, you know, one of those. Um,
there are panel discussions of various things and so we were at one of the like
functions and, uh,
it was a situation where like dinner hadn't yet been served and there was a lot
of booze being served. Everybody was like drunk on an empty stomach.
So I was standing there with some biologists. Oh, they're the fun ones.
The junk biologists. Yes. My people fairly. And uh, they, uh, we were,
they, they started to lose their shit,
like genuinely lose their shit about this thing called crisper. And like,
I've never seen scientists this excited about anything. So I was like,
what is this thing? Wait, what is CRISPR?
And they were trying to explain it to me,
but they couldn't slow down enough for me to get it.
I gathered it had something to do with genetics. And then at one point, one of
the biologists tournament, he was like, I'll tell you what it is.
I can use CRISPR to take a little dog and Poof, make it into a big dog.
Give me a Chihuahua. I could turn it into the size of a great Dane.
And I was like, no, you can't. He's like, yes I can. I could do it with CRISPR.
I was like, what the hell is this thing? Do you want me to sit here as usual?
If you sit here, I will get out, let me know, imply, and I know,
no, no, no, no. You'd be sitting here together.
So what happened was I came back and I immediately called science writer Carl
Zimmer, because I just figured for this kind of thing. It's as a Karl thing.
I got to talk to Carl. So I, uh,
I basically asked them the awake while the fuss,
maybe it was just the alcohol or,
but maybe there's something really happening here. Oh,
there's something totally happening here. I mean, it's big.
He started at the beginning. So the, the,
you can actually find like the first reference to CRISPR in a 1987 paper from
some Japanese scientists.
They basically described something weird in Nikolai and they said,
we don't know what this is. Ecolab are bacteria inside humans.
And like all living things equalize made up of DNA, A's and t's and C's and g's.
And what happened was that these scientists were reading a chunk of that genetic
code when they found this really strange stretch of DNA,
strange channel. Well, so basically what it was, um,
was five identical sequences
in a row.
And then they were separated by very short sequences in between them that were
all different from each other. These little blurbs, it'd be like,
okay,
[inaudible]
and they looked at this and I'm like, well, what,
this is nothing like we've seen before.
Repeated sequences in bacterial genomes are kind of unusual.
Seems very strange. Some biologists felt that, you know,
there must be a purpose for these among those purpose seekers. Jennifer Doudna,
University of California Berkeley. She's a cell biologist. Yeah.
So it's Doudna not dude. No, it's Doudna. I used to be called the dude, uh,
sometimes in the, in school,
but in the movie she will be played by Jeff Bridges. Right. Anyhow,
same goes on.
A scientist are seeing these little repeat blurb repeats everywhere. Yes.
Releasing bacteria. Lots and lots of, lots of species of bacteria. They say,
okay, wait a minute. That's kind of cool.
They're finding it so often that they decided they had to give it a name.
And this is where the name CRISPR comes from. Yes.
The full official name is clustered regularly.
Interspaced short palindromic repeats. Oh my God. Oh,
I don't know why they called it CRISPR. It's kind of a good spirit.
It's like a furniture manufacturer or something. It sounds like an app. Yeah.
Yeah. CRISPR. CRISPR. But now scientists had this puzzle,
if nature at this level preserve something intact here and here and here and
here and here and here. And some of these heroes are,
are creatures that have been around for a hundreds of millions of years.
You figure, well, whatever this is, it's doing something, doing something,
but what it doesn't take very long before the first big clue comes up.
All right, fast forward 2005 now,
scientists have these big searchable databases of DNA sequences,
so some scientists think, well, let's do a search.
Let's see if these repeating patterns. We keep finding match.
Anything else that's out there in the world and the scientists are using
computers to just line up these structures of DNA with thousands upon thousands
of different species and then click.
All of a sudden they discover that those bits of DNA between the repeats,
the stuff in the middle, those blurps, these are matching virus DNA.
Like you can find viruses with genes where these little,
you know these little two, the bacteria had virus inside of them. Yup.
Is that what that mean? That a virus brought it into these cells?
The origin of it. The first recognition was this is virus DNA.
Somehow all these bacteria have little snippets of virus DNA wedged in these
particular places in their genome,
which is a little weird if you think about it.
I mean these are totally different creatures.
It would be like inside a human finding, a little bit of mosquito DNA.
You're one. How do we interpret this? Well, actually there was one scientist,
his name is Eugene Koonin who looked at these results and just said, okay,
I get it. It's a defense system. Why would he think that?
Because he's a brilliant man. What do you mean? I went to,
if I went to a large sanitation dump and I found a teeny bit of human hair,
why would I think, oh, I got it. It's a defense mechanism. I wouldn't know it.
Just like a human, right. Well, you see I,
that metaphor might sort of betray your lack of scale and microbiology.
I'm just saying like this is not a dump. All right.
This is bacteria are not gonna just let virus DNA get into their genes willy
nilly. Okay. Remember, viruses are the big enemy, right?
If your bacteria, viruses make your life a nightmare.
Think about it in the ocean. Okay.
The the ocean is full of viruses and viruses kill up to 40% of all of those
bacteria every day. Really? Every day. Yeah,
and we know that they have defenses. What Eugene Koonin said was,
okay,
I'm going to bet that these bacteria are somehow grabbing pieces of DNA from
viruses and then they're storing it and now they have a way of recognizing those
viruses if they come in later. Ah,
like little Polaroid shots of the enemy, right? No, thy enemy. Yeah,
like a most wanted
poster. What do you call the Mugshot?
This is Eugene Koonin leader of the evolutionary genomics group at the National
Center for Biotechnology Information.
He's the guy that Carl referenced who thunk up the whole idea that maybe these
bits of virus DNA inside the bacteria is the bacteria trying to defend itself,
but really if I, if I, if I couldn't eat myself with anything here,
it was not so much guessing this because you know,
then you see the identical sequence that gets pretty obvious. It is
figuring out how the mechanism was likely to go.
So can you walk us through how the mechanism is likely to work? All right.
What happens
if you know, when a virus comes in
to a cell, I just kind of
explodes and just kind of releases naked genes.
Basically if you're this bacteria,
these things might take over your cells so you've got to respond,
move struck that guy, you should have mo tippo vap, arms of defense.
If you've never seen this virus before,
usually the first thing you do says Eugene is you send out these enzymes to
attack the viruses.
They're sort of like the ground troops and they fight really hard but much of
the time
fail and then no one will Heuer hear about you again.
They're not terribly sophisticated fighters, so very often virus takes over,
the bacteria dies,
but but there is some non zero probability
that you actually survive that. If you do,
then what the bacterial do is send in some new enzymes to basically clean up,
to go out,
find any stray viruses and then caught the enemy DNA into futile smokes
Jesus. And here he says is where you get to the storage part.
Those enzymes will then take those little bits of virus and shove them into the
bacteria, his own DNA,
right in those little spaces between the repeats right there and nobody else.
So I use those spaces in my own DNA as a storage facility.
Yes. If your view is as a, as a, as a,
you use it as a memory device because here's what happens next time that virus
shows up,
sprays it, jeans everywhere.
Now you are prepared and this is where the CRISPR story really gets going
because instead of sending out the ground troops,
we're probably going to get their asses beat.
Now you can actually send out the big gun
[inaudible]
and in fact what the cell does is it will manufacture these special molecular
assassins in.
We'll give those assassins a copy of that little bit of virus DNA it has in
stores, basically saying, here, take this.
If you see anything that matches this pattern, kill it. Yeah.
And these attackers, do we know what they let one of them looks like. Yup.
So we know what the protein looks like. It it, um, it actually looks,
I would describe it, um, a little bit like a clamshell sort of imagine pack man,
but kind of misshapen and rough in each one of these guys.
What it has is a copy of that virus DNA.
It's got the mugshot that it's kind of waving around.
What then happens is that whenever the PAC man bumps into some virus DNA,
it pulls apart the DNA and zips. It reads it.
If it's not the right one, it goes on.
Nope.
Okay.
[inaudible]
and if that RNA has the same sequence,
then click click. It just locks in. And if that happens,
then the DNA is trapped and molecular blades
come out
and chop got, you didn't get shared. Did a mighty blow. Yeah.
So this is smart scissors too. It's like, are you like the thing I got?
Are you like, say I got your, like to think I got sniff snip. All right,
now we're going to kill.
Oh, I see. And it has to be exact. It has to be an exact match.
When scientists first discovered this whole system, they were fascinated.
They were like, they're working it out. They're like, oh, okay.
Then this happens and this happens. This happens. Cool.
But then in walks the dude,
Jennifer Doudna with a crazy idea, I don't know if it's crazy radical.
This could be an amazing technology. This is a tool.
This is a tool. Yes, right?
This is a tool that we can use to cut DNA where we want to cut.
The basic thought was, why don't we turn this defense into offsets?
Because these things,
they seem to be really good at cutting and yet they only seem to cut the things
that are on their mugshot.
So maybe I could just replace what's on their mugshot.
So instead of them going after viruses,
maybe they could go after a gene that causes Huntington's disease or hemophilia,
for example. And this is actually something that's been done.
So you've got a mouse with something like
hemophilia. Okay? This is a diseases caused by one bad gene.
So what you do is you take these little surgeons,
you give them the mugshot for the bad gene,
then you stick the surgeon with the new mugshot and a mouse.
Then you set it loose and just like it's program to it,
we'll find that gene and
click, click chop
the scissors.
We'll end up cutting exactly the gene you wanted to cut to,
the bad genes gone. Now the question is how do you put in the good gene? Right,
right.
It turns out actually according to Jennifer Doudna that that's actually not as
hard as you would think. Really. Yeah.
Apparently what you do is just throw this new good gene kind of in the
neighborhood
of where the old genius to be just in the general vicinity.
You don't have to get super precise. I mean, it turns out that um, you know,
there are repair enzymes that are probably continually surveying and checking
for breaks. She says what will happen is that inside the cell,
these repair crews come along. They'll see the break,
they'll see the good gene just sitting there next to the break,
there'll be like, all right,
I'll just stick it in and put the pretty guy in this space. Exactly. So,
so we take advantage of a natural repair pathway that cells have.
They tricked both the cutters and the fixers. Yeah.
Now we're not assassinating anymore. Now we're actually engineering.
We've gone from killing to refashioning.
[inaudible]
well, haven't we been designing genes doing genetic,
a form of genetic engineering for, I don't know, like 30 years. Yes. But
not like this.
[inaudible]
genome editing technologies have been around for a long time,
but none of them have been as powerful as CRISPR is.
That's Beth Shapiro from UC Santa Cruz.
She was actually one of the biologists that I drunkenly talk to at that thing,
elicit a modern art museum. I can't even really remember. I remember either
to have the setting be so vague and yeah, here's how she put it to us. Um,
back in the day, this was just like two years ago,
you'd have these gene editor things. You would take one, put it in a cell.
And what happened before was you would give it an some instructions about where
to go and it might go there,
but it might go to somewhere that's kind of related to where that was.
So it's like you just take it right at Staten Island, but it takes a left.
And not only would it take a left at Staten Island and not find there,
but it would've cost you a fortune and taken up six months of your time to get
that thing. And now you know it's really easy.
You just give it that mugshot and it goes, I'm going to find that guy. Exactly.
So it seems to be pretty precise and it's cheap.
Like the old tools would set you back about five grand just to use them once
CRISPR but 75 bucks. And here's the kicker says Carl,
it seems at the moment that you can take these things out of bacteria,
stick them into almost any other creature
and it still works. You can use the same CRISPR system on anything.
Can you like do it?
If corn is vulnerable [inaudible] past you can do in corn and corn do it in
anything. I have not.
I'm waiting for someone to say CRISPR doesn't work in species x and I have not
heard of that.
So basically what you have for the first time in science is this gene editing
technology that is cheap, precise, and possibly universal.
And Jennifer Doudna says the moment, the full impact of that landed on her.
I really, I literally had, you know,
the hairs on the back of my neck were standing up
[inaudible]
processing the fact that this thing exists, you know,
and that you could actually program it to cut DNA and just like this molecular
scissors and I can just program it and it cuts DNA Roeder I want
it is amazing unless you think about it further,
which we will do in just a moment.
I feel a cloud coming in over their eyes and just over there. Do you see,
I see it's getting sort of horizon park over there, but we'll be right back.
Okay.
Hi, this is Lauren from Atlanta, Georgia.
Radiolab is supported in part by the Alfred p Sloan Foundation,
enhancing public understanding of science and technology in the modern world.
More information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org
okay.
This is Adelaide in Manchester, England. Radiolab is supported by UC Davis,
a globally ranked university working to solve the world's most pressing problems
in food, energy, health, education, and the environment.
UC Davis researchers collaborate and innovate in California and around the globe
to find transformational solutions.
It's all part of the university's mission to promote quality of life for all
living things. Find out more@twentyfirstcenturydotucdavis.edu
this is Radiolab, mom, Jab and Ron. I'm Robert Krulwich. Okay, so, uh,
clearly the possibilities are there to use CRISPR to treat disease, right?
Right. But what if you could get a little more fanciful, right?
Like what if you could actually go back in time and resurrect long lost
creatures? I mean, this is something the Best Shapiro is talked about a lot.
We could reconstruct using a computer what the genome sequence of the ancestor
of all birds was, and that would have been a kind of dinosaur.
And then we could use crispers to turn a chicken into that thing.
Or what if you could take an elephant and snip, snip, snip,
gradually turn it in to its long lost relative the wooly mammoth?
No, cause they're related. But if they're very similar over well,
right. But if you know the wooly mammoth genome,
which they do because they apparently got it off some bone or some hair. Yeah.
Then you could compare the number of differences.
You use CRISPR to CRISPR out the different parts of the elephant and put in
wooly mammoth instead.
Have you been in effect, go backwards in time and make changes in,
obviously I think you can go the other way too, right? I mean,
humans are good at design. We're designing animals.
So if it doesn't seem to me to be a crazy notion to imagine parents all over the
world wanting, I don't know, taller children.
So silencing the short jeans and favoring the taller jeans,
getting rid of weak muscles and going for stronger ones and on and on and on and
on. I don't know where the designing stops.
We sort of got into all of this with, uh, Carl Zimmer, science writer. If,
if you can
be very, very gene specific and you learn more and more about genes over time,
why couldn't you invent a creature? Why couldn't you make a pig with wings? You,
you might one day get sophisticated enough to do that.
There's no wing at pig lab. You know,
the best you're going to hope for right now is the woolly mammoth lab.
And that's down the hall from where the, where the, the real action is,
is now there's a hall and at the end of the fall, use a winded Piccolo. No,
nope. Yeah, I did. It may be 20 years from now.
But that's what you're looking at. Well, I think, but the thing is that
it shouldn't anyone meal as that, that's really what we're talking about.
Well, because you can't make weight wing into pigs just because of sort of
evolutionary barriers. Okay. Well, there's no reason for about to fly gentlemen.
Calm down. Calm down. I'm just not, I mean, okay.
I don't think that we need a federal department of homeland pig with wings
security. I think we're okay there. All right,
well we do need is like a,
we do need to like figure out what are we going to do about CRISPR and humans.
I mean, they're going to be using CRISPR for cancer. Okay.
They're going to take people's immune cells out of their body and they're going
to use CRISPR to basically allow them to make proteins are going to be able to
grab onto cancer cells and attack their own cancer. Yeah. That's to be for that.
I mean you have to be, well, I don't know. I mean are you for that is your,
your, your you, you are tink. You are tinkering with someone's own body.
You are altering their own cells. You know,
dude,
where do I, it's just, I tell you, this is me.
I don't know if it's a religious thought or just the thought of a conservative
person, but I mean I've, I grew up in the, in the test to baby era.
I now know many wonderful adult formerly test tube babies and I,
I remember being astonished that no, so I can't,
I don't know where the sacred begins and ends anymore on that particular turf.
I guess what I'm instead on is I'm on, on um, uh,
Hobbsy in view of human beings that there is something about human beings
including scientist, human beings, all human beings. That is,
there's a darkness and a light there, there, there,
there's an angelic side to being human and there's a very,
very difficult side of,
as the human beings get more and more power to create and design and essentially
create a future,
that future will include the imaginations both light and dark of humans and that
will be new in the world.
I don't think it is new because if you go back to the start of the scientific
revolution,
someone like Francis Bacon would say explicitly like science is going to be both
about learning about how the world works and using that knowledge to control it.
You know, this has been discovered. This has been published.
Everybody knows it exists. Hmm. Um, if you, if you're going to say like, okay,
now we're going to all, we're going to outlaw this.
I'm not saying festing that well, what are you suggesting?
I think we should cringe level as opposed to just the big part. Right?
That's all grains. Ready? One, two, three.
[inaudible] what did we've cringed in that way? What do we do now? Well,
who does, I don't know, but we all come in if that's what you're arguing.
[inaudible] you cringed meanly and deep and you
[inaudible] with attitude. I am cringing with, with, I would like,
because you're afraid of like dragons.
You're saying?
You're saying, oh my God, yes. I'm afraid of dragging them down. Okay.
So that conversation with Carl was four months ago and uh,
a lot has happened in, in, in that time because to the question that you asked,
like where does the sacred beginning end? Well,
one of the lines that had been drawn by Jennifer Doudna and others was that we
should not use this technology on humans who haven't been born yet,
meaning not on sperm cells or egg cells.
Because if you CRISPR say an embryo, that is a
permanent change, right?
That is a change to the DNA that will be passed on to their children and their
children's children and their children's children's children.
And you can't ask the person if that's okay because you're doing it before
they're born. Consent becomes a real issue.
And if you imagine making these changes and they cascade through generation
after generation, you could affect the evolution of organisms. And it's,
I don't want to say trivial, but it's, you know, it's fairly easy to do it. Wow.
It's kind of profound. I feel it's really profound. Profound.
But it was just an idea
that is until for the first time in history,
researchers in China have successfully edited the human genome and an embryo.
Just two months ago, it was announced that a Chinese team from Estonia,
Watson University use a technique called CRISPR to edit DNA in human embryos.
It's a way of hacking evolution itself. Well,
this is hugely controversial now these embryos, the Chinese team had edited,
they were created through IVF and they were not viable,
but these are embryos that are not going to actually develop into a person,
so they're, they're going to be discarded anyway. It's still thinking,
figuring it out with those embryos. What's to stop any of us from going further?
I ologist and bioethicists are sounding an alarm.
Scientists face accusations that they crossed an ethical line.
That's the sort of thing could be sort of a slippery slope towards toward
designer babies. Essentially genetically engineering the human race.
That's your chance to kind of test your levels. Okay.
Now that the cringe party had spread and Robert didn't seem like such a loon.
Yeah, we called up Carl again. Well, we have to revisit.
We have to revisit it because in our Iron Mageddon conversation in which I
believe I was extremely alarmist and you were extremely down pudding,
I feel that I should do a small little parade called the
the Alamo. It's like, and remember, remember China and you have to close.
You should just begin anytime you want.
Like getting on your knees and saying how sorry you are. I don't,
can you start from there? Um, I'm sorry.
So are we actually surrounded by, uh,
an army of clones with superpowers? Not yet. Not yet,
but I think the dyke has been opened. I believe,
I'm going to quote somebody who said, uh, maybe a few weeks ago,
I think maybe it was last week, even writing for National Geographic.
I think it was, maybe it was somebody named Carl who said that, uh,
the news from China and that news was probably the beginning of an entire new
era. I think I actually said it was a historical moment. Yes. Right? Yes, yes.
And I, and I still stand by that. Do you feel
differently now than the first time we talked? Yeah, that's really the question.
I don't feel different actually because, um,
there's really no scientific surprise here.
He says,
people have been doing all these CRISPR experiments and all these different
mammals, we're mammals. This is bound to happen.
And in fact it may be happening more than we think.
One account in the journal Nature has said that four other Chinese labs are
doing this kind of work as we speak. But Carl also told us,
which he said was unsurprising too,
but I actually find kind of surprising that the CRISPR work,
this Chinese team did didn't work very well.
It worked kind of.
I mean,
and only a few of the cases did they really get exactly what they wanted.
Um,
they tried using CRISPR and about 86 embryos and they only get up to work right
in maybe 28 and then a lot of them,
CRISPR made the wrong cuts and screwed up the cells and that led them to
conclude that this is a technology that's not ready right now for application in
the human germline. And, um, I, I agree. Hello?
We're starting of,
we still are in this kind of a fortunate position where we can say,
oh well it's dangerous so we shouldn't use it on in human embryos.
I just don't think that we're going to be able to sort of uh,
find refuge there in like 10 or 20 years in 10 or 20 years. You know,
CRISPR will be so sophisticated that people will be able to say,
I can get you the change you want and I can do it safely.
I can guarantee you that you will have human embryos that have the alteration in
the particular gene you want. So then, yeah,
in fact Jennifer Doudna told us that this experiment or similar experiments have
been repeated in mice with more advanced CRISPR systems.
Cause apparently there are many different kinds and they're,
it was done with almost no errors.
I feel like we're sort of displacing all our ethical concerns on to something
that hasn't happened yet.
We really are concerned about what we're doing to the human gene pool. You know,
it's already here.
Take as an example,
in vitro fertilization bout 60,000 kids are born a year through IVF.
And it's probable that some of those parents chose whether they wanted a boy
or a girl. And when people started doing IVF, there was a huge controversy.
People said this was dangerous. This was unnatural.
I don't see people who are unable to sleep at night because of the existence of
IVF. Yeah, yeah. Now I'm going to sound like I'm on Robert side of this. I mean,
okay. So, so they won't, it won't. It will. Okay. All right.
Here we go. So, okay, so,
so you guys know about, uh,
all the stuff going on Iceland where they're looking at people's DNA and they're
looking for disease genes and so on.
And when they were looking at these Icelandic people,
they found that some people had a gene that, uh,
protects them against Alzheimer's. It reduces their odds of getting Alzheimer's.
Let's imagine your doctor said now if you'd like for an extra thousand dollars,
we will take these IVF embryos and we will use CRISPR to give them the Alzheimer
protecting variant. Would you like that?
Do you want to add that to your, to your procedure? Sure.
Or would you like your child to,
to face a future of have Alzheimer's,
your choice.
See, here's my, here's my thing. Here's my thing with this whole,
with this whole thing, I'm, I'm a little bit haunted by the thing you said,
which is that when it's not dangerous anymore, what will we do?
And I'm afraid we've already answered that question, that it's not,
it's not a question that's open anymore because if we're already doing this kind
of stuff and who's going to say no to that is going to say no to that we're
demonstrating. Yeah, we've already answered the question.
Yeah. We may have.
So that's how we ended our piece, which is now two years old,
roughly roughly.
And the drunk biologists at Cheddar cocktail party couldn't have been more
pressured. When you think about it, this is one of those,
this is one of the strange cases where like you do a story usually like we just
kind of leave it behind, we move on to other things.
But in the last almost two years,
so much has happened believable that we figured we need to update this thing.
And so what we did is we asked a,
our producer editors who on wheeler and our producer Molly Webster to sort of
just go out, ask around and make some calls and tell us, you know,
what's been going on. Well for one, uh, Molly,
do you want to give him the big news and Jennifer Lopez is going to do a
television show based on CRISPR? No,
I mean it's fiction active role in the fictional narrative of the show. Oh.
Like she's a, she's a cop or something and
buy something and crisper's involved really
headline. Let me show you the scissors. Wow. It's cross over to that extent.
That's the thing is like it's, it's um, yeah cause I like the,
I was like Jennifer Lopez knows about CRISPR and she was like this is such a
button issue. We're doing a show. That's amazing. Yeah. Okay.
So so moving Jay, putting Jay Lewis side. Yeah,
let's do some science developments.
They've kind of been quite a few of them are,
we know there've been a few of those, right? Yeah.
What did that with run us through those. I mean,
I guess I would just say that it's being used everywhere now.
So it's being used in crops. It's being used in medicine.
It's being used in basic research. It's being used in humans, in humans.
Really it's being used in eyeballs. Yeah.
They want to start a clinical trial where they're actually injecting a syringe
full of CRISPR carrying viruses into your eyeball to overcome a genetic
condition that leads to blindness.
So this would be like the viruses injecting the CRISPR that then goes and cuts
out the bad genes. Yeah, exactly.
Take, you know,
a big syringe full of viruses and just stick it in people's eyes.
Yeah. So of course when we did the update, Soren and I called Carl Zimmer.
Yeah. It's a, things are moving
very fast and what kinds of things.
So they are doing things that look like curing diseases.
So Carl told us about one study where it seems like they cured a certain type of
muscular dystrophy and mice cured muscular, cured, muscular dystrophy and mice.
Wow. Well then mice don't become normal mice, but they get much,
much stronger than they would have been. Yeah.
So in your body you have a gene that makes a protein that gives your muscle
strength,
but with muscular dystrophy there's like a typo in that gene and mutation.
And so that proteins not made and
the result is that, uh, your muscles,
we'll start to turn into sort of a fat like substance.
That's how it's been described. No power. Yeah. Okay.
So your diaphragm gets weaker and weaker, your heart gets weaker.
So in this case, they use CRISPR to fix that gene.
So you get the protein in these mice and they actually saw like the heart gets
stronger or the mouse was able to push with more force on a button.
And so they said over weeks they just saw like strength building up. Really? Oh,
are they going to do that in humans? Pretty first.
Pretty first step at this point. But
yeah,
this is literally like one of the first experiments to show that this approach
could work in muscular dystrophy.
But I mean that's not a disease with a cure.
Is that not until potentially in mice now? Yeah. Wow. Yeah.
And there are some human trials that have either started or are probably going
to start soon treating cancer
for example, people are talking about one in lung cancer.
They think they can what? Sure. Lung cancer,
no.
What they want to do though is they want to use CRISPR to go into immune cells
where it would cut out the part of the DNA that kind of puts the brake on the
immune cell.
And so you're,
you're taking your immune cell off the leash and it can attack,
uh, tumors more aggressively. I see.
So the folks who invented then must
stand to earn a fortune. I mean, I think, oh billions.
There's actually a big patent dispute that's happening right now. So one of the,
right now, this is the one thing that I have heard about, a lot of,
you had been checking your CRISPR inbox. You might've seen last week,
there were two teams, Jennifer Doudna, his team out at UC Berkeley.
The one we just heard from. Yeah, sort of the west coast team.
And then on the other side is this group of researchers at the Brode Institute,
which is on the east coast. And so basically they both filed for um,
a CRISPR patent. So there was sort of this like east coast,
west coast for the last year showdown.
And just last week, um,
the US patent office decided that it would indeed go to brode.
This is the, not doubt and a team, but not doubt and a team,
but there are more patents to be awarded and there will probably be appeal.
So I don't think anyone thinks it's settled yet.
So in the civil war of,
over over CRISPR patents, there has been a Gettysburg,
but the war is not one that, there are many more battles,
I think that will happen. Gotcha. Yeah. There, is there anything else on the,
on the list of like what's happening now? Exciting stuff happening now? Oh yeah.
Can I, oh, can I tell the guy? Can we do favorite store and can I do,
can I do my favorite? And then you can do your favorite. Um, some my,
my favorite came from Carl.
Yeah. Yeah. They're actually trying to use it, uh, as an alternative antibiotics
w we had, I didn't even understand what that means.
I was like getting antibiotic to me, it's a pill that I take.
So what would CRISPR Howard CRISPR replaced that your pill would have CRISPR in
it? How would it work? You know,
in the same way you would take your amoxicillin or your antibiotic pill,
you would actually take a pill that was filled with CRISPR and then it would go
out and it would fight bacteria that is attacking your body.
So you could pick out, you know,
some super essential gene that it has and chop it and that will kill the
bacteria.
Oh, it would have turned the assassins on the bacteria. Exactly.
So there you go. Wow. Yeah. The antibiotic thing seems huge, right?
Because everyone's at this moment where they're like,
what happens with the next super bug?
If you could actually just go in there and kamikaze the DNA of like staff or
whatever, he'd be solving a lot of illnesses. Yeah. Well what's,
what's is sore in your face with, with your face?
The coolest thing I guess for me. Hello? Maybe the scariest too. Hi Kevin.
How are you? I'm doing great. How are you?
Came from a conversation that we had with this guy, Kevin.
I'm Kevin Esvelt asphalt. It's very smelt. I'm at the MIT media lab.
He was sort of on the early edge of thinking about CRISPR. I'm an,
I think of myself as an evolutionary engineer before anything else got into
biology because when he was a kid, you went to the Galapagos. Yeah.
My parents took me there when I was 10 or so and I was just captivated,
just looking at all of the creatures and I thought,
I want to make organisms that are as beautiful as that.
You actually thought I wanna make organisms as beautiful as that. Yeah.
That's like the childhood vision and then it's so hard, right?
It wasn't possible. And so you sort of forget it. But now with CRISPR,
like almost like all things become possible. So anyway,
to get to the crazy part, Kevin, couple of years back,
he's working at the Harvard medical school and one day he's walking to work
through this, um, this park, this park called the Emerald Necklace in Boston.
It's,
it's beautiful and there's a small river flowing through it and you have these
ponds and there's turtles and whatever geese and, and you know,
he's thinking about CRISPR and what it can do and all these different animals
that are around him. And he has this, this thought,
what if we could encode CRISPR in the genome?
What if we programmed the genome to do genome editing on its own? Wait,
what? What I'm, I'm, I'm not sure I follow that. What does he,
what is he saying? Well, the first gene drive system here,
maybe this is a way to think about it.
Let's say that you want to tweak a mosquito and make it so that the little
parasite that carries malaria, terrible, awful malaria,
either can't get into the mosquito or can't live in it.
And so that mosquito will no longer carry malaria. That would be great.
That would be a great thing because malaria is a bad thing.
So you could now take CRISPR,
send it into the mosquito and change a gene inside the mosquito.
So now that mosquito either doesn't let malaria parasite in or kills it or
whatever, but basically doesn't carry it and, and that's great.
But then I put it out into the wild and it's got us fend for itself amongst all
the other mosquitoes. So my mosquito has a special gene,
but it's going to mate with some mom, mosquito.
And that mom mosquito is going to have the normal old gene and the baby's going
to get my special gene, but it's also going to get the normal gene.
And that means that your baby has like a 50% chance of having your special tree.
Oh. Because only one of those two genes gets expressed in the baby.
And then in the next generation, the grand baby,
there's only a 25% chance and you know, on and on and on.
So you're exponentially losing CRISPR powers.
Your chances just each generation get less and less that this gene is going to
stick around. That's right. Because regardless of what we do,
natural selection wins in the end until Kevin is walking to work through the
park and has his idea,
which is to use CRISPR to create something called a gene drive.
Gene drive change. Yeah.
Instead of just snip the DNA and insert the gene that we want,
we also insert the genes that encode the CRISPR system and tell it to make that
particular change. Here's how it works.
You go into the mosquito and give it the new gene that makes it resistant to
malaria and then right next to that you put the genes for the CRISPR system.
You just use to make that change.
Like you're putting it like a spare scissors or something. Yeah.
And here's how that plays out.
Your first mosquito has this gene with the new change and it also has this
scissors. Yeah. And then it meets some normal mosquito,
which has the normal gene, the two end up side by side in the baby.
And now the new mosquito gene makes the little scissors,
which go over to the normal gene snippet and turn it into itself.
So now there's two copies of the new gene in the offspring without any human
assistance.
CRISPR will cut the original version and copy over the change that gene does.
The work that I used to do in the lab on its own inside the baby.
Oh, interesting. So, okay, so the, so the, it's like I set it on autopilot.
So you're basically allowing them the mosquito parent to pass the scissors to
the baby, which then snip, snip, snip,
and then that baby passes the scissors to the next baby snip, snip, snip. Yep.
Yep. And it is literally like a chain reaction. Yeah. And so, you know,
from baby to grand baby to great grandbaby now instead of letting that gene
disappear, you're driving it into the next generation.
And then that just keeps going
down the line, down the line, down the line. Yes.
This is something that spreads indefinitely.
This gene is going to spread like wildfire through the entire wild populations
that you don't change just one mosquito.
You change all of those insects probably everywhere in the world.
According to Kevin.
This is the kind of change that could given enough time spread across an entire
species.
So this,
this idea of the mosquitoes and watching it rampage through a population.
Have they done this? Um, after we had first published the idea,
we tried it in east, worked on the first dry, you know,
they just plopped a little yeast loaded with the gene drive into a population to
see if it would take over and one week later. Yup.
And Kevin told us there are probably now I think it's 10 different groups who
are working on gene drive system.
Yes.
They are doing it in mosquitoes and in parasitic worms and in rodents,
uh, it's all happening in the lab, but still they are
trying out, you know, this,
this method for spreading genes through a population. Yeah.
I just think that's awesome.
It's terrifying. Like, honestly, I just keep thinking of, it's like, oh we've,
we've just hit over a domino and then walked away and aren't watching where the
rest of them are falling. Yeah.
I'm very glad you think that it took me one full day to reach that point.
Initially I was late at, Oh let me tell you,
there is nothing like the sheer elation of discovery and I was thinking that,
you know this, this is the end of malaria. This is the end of everything else.
Mosquitoes spread. Wait a minute, you know, tick spread Lyme disease.
We can probably get rid of that too. I thought in the morning you were like,
you're singing to the turtles in the, in the park.
And pretty much I give myself a full day of being who and then I started
thinking but, but, but,
but what if something goes wrong?
And suppose let's go back to your case making the mosquitoes and malaria
resistant. Well that seems pretty safe.
I mean malaria is a human pathogen doesn't really affect other animals.
But what if say the change you make to the mosquito makes it slightly more toxic
to something that eats those mosquitoes, then you have to consider, okay,
what eats those mosquitoes and what eats those things?
You know,
it could be that all the frogs or the fish or whatever start to die off and then
that makes something else die off and something else die off.
And that's an incredibly complex system and you just, you just don't know.
Or it could be that making a mosquito malaria resistant also somehow makes it do
better in some environment.
Then the mosquito population blows up and then it turns out that it somehow
makes it easier to carry some other disease. So,
and you're likely to go wrong. Yeah. And you're no, yeah,
but how do you know we should save this point that Kevin is really thinking
about all this stuff?
He brought together a group of scientists to come up with some safeguards for
this type of research so it doesn't escape out of the lab.
And his team is only working with this a version of gene drive that they,
they sort of rigged it so that it only lasts for certain number of generations
and it sort of runs out of steam.
But scientists can perfectly well start playing around with something in the lab
that could affect a whole lot of other people if it happened to escape.
I think what this technology forces us to reckon with is that now it's at least
theoretically, and again we don't know for sure,
but it's theoretically possible for one person to decide to change the local or
possibly the global environment. And that's,
that's ethically problematic, right? Yeah.
I mean, you know, if, if,
and when somebody uses crisper, uh,
on an embryo and that embryo goes up into a person,
that will be a momentous thing. But if you were to gene drive somebody,
think about that, you know, gene drive, like say a few people and,
and not tell them and you know, they have kids and so on, like,
and you'd be driving whatever gene it is that you are engineering.
I'm into more and more people. Um, and uh, that's, that's different.
God, you know what I'm thinking about? The thing that Jennifer Doudna said,
I think it was her in our first piece about like if you make a change in say an
embryo, like you looking, let me give this,
let me snip snips and they have given this future child make it taller, right?
Whatever. Like you're doing that without the consent of that unborn thing. Yes.
But if, if you,
if you now do what you guys are talking about using this gene drive thing,
well now you're doing it without the consent of that unborn thing and all future
generations of that unborn thing. And so the consent issues just become like,
yeah, unfathomable. Exactly. You know, I guess we're all for taller,
but we're
not all for taller.
So in the end it has something to do with democracy itself.
Like you sit there with a tool of change in your hand and you choose it.
But in the act we with this gene drive in the act of choosing it for yourself
this way,
you choose it for an uncountable number of others who do not have the choice.
A
[inaudible].
Thanks you too.
Soren Wheeler and Molly Webster for the update and a until I guess all the
people we thanked the first time because I was thanks still till stand still
stand.
Many thanks to science writer Carl Zimmer has written many books.
You can check them out@carlzimmer.com or@radiolab.org this piece was produced by
Molly Webster. We had original music this hour by Eric Kowalski,
otherwise known as casino versus Japan.
[inaudible]
special thanks to honor rush. Quick paths. Lead Maguire, Dr. Blake weaken half.
Dr Luciano Mar Feeney, Dr. John Burgess, and Dr Jen way she,
I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich. Thanks for listening.